GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
inside the Panama
Papers, how one of the largest
data leaks
in history allegedly shows world
leaders using
offshore companies to hide their
wealth.
Also ahead, the battle for
Wisconsin. Both
parties' front-runners face
hurdles, as candidates
make a final push before
tomorrow's primary.
And with the falling price of
oil, one of
America's most reliable allies
against ISIS
is going broke.
SAFIN DIZAYI, Kurdish Regional
Government
Spokesman: Often, people say
that Peshmergas
are fighting on behalf of the
international
community and the free world. If
that is the
case, then there has to be more
assistance.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Europe moved in
earnest today
to reverse the human flood
spilling into the
continent. It took the form of
deportations
from Greece involving the first
of what could
be thousands of people.
Malcolm Brabant reports on the
day's developments.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As dawn broke,
the first
of more than 200 migrants,
mostly Pakistanis
and Afghans, were ferried from
the Greek islands
back to Turkey.
Escorted by officers from the
E.U.'s border
agency, they were taken to tents
for registration
and health checks. At the same
time, 32 Syrian
refugees were flown from
Istanbul to Hannover,
Germany, to be resettled. The
exchange is
part of Turkey's deal with the
European Union
to end more than a year of
uncontrolled migration.
MAN: Greece and Turkey are
implementing the
agreement lawfully and the
commission and
the agencies are on the ground
advising with
advice and expertise.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The deal aims
to discourage
economic migrants and those
fleeing conflict
from making the perilous sea
journey, as well
as to close down
people-smuggling networks.
In return, Turkey receives
financial aid and
expedited E.U. membership talks.
The Turkish prime minister
rejected claims
that his nation was not safe for
returnees.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister (through
translator): Today, as we take
back Syrian
refugees from Europe, my request
to our police
officers is to treat those who
consider Turkey
with an embrace of mercy with
compassion,
and don't distinguish them from
our own citizens.
PROTESTERS: E.U., shame on you!
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dozens of
protesters gathered
at the port in Lesbos to
denounce the deportations.
MAN: They are being forcibly
returned to Turkey,
and Turkey is not a safe
country. Turkey has
not signed the Geneva Convention
in full.
Only Syrians are enjoying some
kind of protection
in Turkey, and all the other
migrants and
refugees are not protected at
all in Turkey.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Human rights
groups also
claim the operation breaches
international
refugee conventions.
WOMAN: These are individuals who
are fleeing
horrific scenes of war and the
kind of abuses
we know from Aleppo, for
example, and we are
playing some type of ping-pong
with them.
These people have a right to
asylum, to safety,
to protection, and we need to
grant it to
them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In all, 50,000
migrants and
refugees remain stranded in
Greece, unable
to travel deeper into Europe.
About 4,000
who arrived after March the
20th, the cutoff
date, and didn't receive asylum,
are being
detained for deportation.
But still, they come. In the
last 24 hours,
more than 300 people made the
dangerous voyage
to Lesbos.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: It was
primary eve in Wisconsin, and
the campaigning
went on almost nonstop. On the
Republican
side, both Donald Trump and Ted
Cruz predicted
victory. And Democrat Bernie
Sanders talked
of scoring a win over
front-runner Hillary
Clinton. We will get a report
from Wisconsin,
and review the race in general,
later in the
program.
Two big state governors signed
bills today
taking their minimum wage to the
highest in
the nation. In California, the
state live-streamed
Governor Jerry Brown's signing
of a new law
which by 2022 will raise the
wage from $10
to $15 an hour.
GOV. JERRY BROWN (D),
California: This is
about economic justice. It's
about people.
It's about creating a little,
tiny balance
in a system that every day
becomes more unbalanced.
GWEN IFILL: And, in New York,
Governor Andrew
Cuomo signed a bill setting a
$15 minimum
for New York City and its
suburbs by 2021.
The rest of the state will rise
to $12.50
an hour. President Obama today
commended the
state efforts. He urged Congress
to hike the
federal minimum as well.
The Supreme Court has
unanimously upheld a
Texas law in the latest battle
over legislative
districts. The law counts
overall population,
not just eligible voters, in
drawing districts.
Challengers said that means some
end up with
far more voters than others. But
the court
ruled the method doesn't violate
the principle
of one person, one vote.
Amtrak trains in the Northeast
are back on
normal schedules, after Sunday's
collision
that killed two maintenance
workers. It happened
when a southbound train struck
heavy maintenance
equipment and derailed outside
Philadelphia.
CNN reported today the
maintenance workers
were on the wrong track, but it
remains unclear
why.
Brussels' main airport ramped up
departures
today after partially reopening
on Sunday.
The facility had been closed
since last month's
attacks. Security was tight
today, as passengers
went through stricter check-in
procedures.
Many said it's about pushing on,
in spite
of the terrorists.
MAN (through translator): It's
terribly sad,
what happened at the airport.
And my first
reaction wasn't to go on holiday
anymore,
but after a couple of days, I
thought that
life should go on and that we
have to resume
all activities. We have to
straighten our
backs and go on.
GWEN IFILL: Twenty flights were
scheduled
to leave today, up from three
yesterday. Officials
say it will be months before
full service
is restored.
In Iraq, a string of suicide
attacks killed
29 people. At least 14 died at a
restaurant
that's popular with Shiite
fighters in the
south. and in Basra, a car bomb
in a commercial
district left five dead. Search
teams sifted
through the charred hulks of
cars looking
for victims. Islamic State
extremists claimed
responsibility for most of the
attacks.
Back in this country, a new
analysis finds
prices of widely used
medications have shot
up sharply in five years.
Reuters reports
manufacturers of four of the top
10 drugs
in the U.S. raised prices by
more than 100
percent since 2011. The cost of
six other
medicines increased by more than
50 percent
in that time, among them, the
arthritis drugs
Humira and Enbrel, and the
asthma drug Advair.
Heart patients have some new
developments
to talk over with their doctors.
Findings
published this week show
anti-cholesterol
statin drugs can prevent heart
attacks even
in patients with only a
borderline risk. And
for those who don't tolerate
statins well,
another study finds an
alternative is showing
promise. It's known as a PCSK9
inhibitor.
BP's record settlement over the
2010 Gulf
oil spill has cleared its final
hurdle. A
federal judge in New Orleans
today approved
the roughly $20 billion deal.
Much of it will
go to state and local
governments. In 2012,
BP reached a similar settlement
on private
damage claims.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost more than 55 points
to close
at 17737. The Nasdaq fell 22
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Panama
Papers, a massive trove of
documents exposing
the secret world of shell
companies and offshore
accounts; In Wisconsin, the
final push for
votes as polls predict tight
races for both
Democrats and Republicans; and
much more.
votes as polls predict tight
races for both
Democrats and Republicans; and
much more.
The project is called the Panama
Papers. It
represents the work of hundreds
of journalists
in dozens of countries,
coordinated by the
International Consortium for
Investigative
Journalism, or ICIJ.
The project exposes the dealings
of a Panamanian
law firm called Mossack Fonseca,
and its work
in allegedly creating shell
companies for
the global rich and powerful to
hide and launder
money and to evade taxes. More
than 11 million
law firm documents were
initially provided
to a German newspaper by an
anonymous source.
Among the world leaders
allegedly involved
in these schemes, the presidents
of Argentina
and Ukraine, the king of Saudi
Arabia, and
the prime minister of Iceland.
The papers also detail the
elaborate financial
dealings of the friends and
relatives of both
Russian President Vladimir Putin
and Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad.
The real-world effect of these
deals is shown,
in part, in this video released
by ICIJ and
the Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting, a
frequent "NewsHour" partner.
NARRATOR: Over the past three
years, Syria's
air forces rained death on more
than 21,000
civilians, their bodies ripped
apart by exploding
barrel bombs, missiles dropped
on homes, businesses,
bus stops, even hospitals.
These war crimes have been
well-documented.
Not so the part played by the
shadowy world
of offshore finance. Behind the
scenes, companies
using offshore tax havens were
accused of
supplying fuel to the Syrian air
force. In
2014, multiple governments,
including the
U.K. and U.S., issued bans on
doing business
with these companies.
But now a new global
investigation has revealed
that a Panamanian firm helped
these companies
operate as attacks in Syria
continued. That
firm, Mossack Fonseca, is a key
player in
a sprawling, secretive industry
that the world's
rich and powerful used to hide
assets and
skirt rules but setting up front
companies
in far-flung jurisdictions.
More than 300 journalists
trolled through
millions of leaked records from
Mossack Fonseca
to expose an alarming list of
clients involved
in bribery, arms deals, tax
evasion, financial
fraud and drug trafficking.
Behind the invoices, e-mails and
paper trails
are real victims. In Uganda, a
company that
wanted to sell a prospective oil
field paid
Mossack Fonseca to help it avoid
$400 million
in taxes. It was sent the
paperwork. The company's
address was changed from one tax
haven to
another. In a country where one
in three people
live on less than $1.25 a day,
$400 million
represents more than the
government's annual
health budget.
Uganda spent years in court
trying to force
the company to pay its taxes.
Meanwhile, hospitals
in the shadow of the oil field
lacked funds
for even the most basic
equipment. Patients
slept on floors and were asked
to bring their
own medical supplies like
sterile gloves and
cotton balls.
WOMAN (through translator): It
was a surprise
to me, because I expected all of
this equipment
to be at the health center. No,
these things
are not there. Nurses say, we
cannot work
on you. At times, we are forced
to leave and
return home unattended to.
Some women have lost their legs
and babies.
NARRATOR: Uganda ranks among the
worst 10
countries in the world for high
maternal,
newborn and child mortality
rates due to a
lack of access to good health
care.
GWEN IFILL: In a statement to
the International
Consortium of Investigative
Journalists, Mossack
Fonseca said it never knowingly
allowed the
use of its companies by
individuals with a
relationship to Syria. The law
firm said it
was quick to report suspicious
activity, always
cooperated with authorities, and
that it doesn't
-- quote -- "offer solutions
whose purpose
is to hide unlawful acts such as
tax evasion."
For more on all of this, we turn
to Gerard
Ryle, the director of the ICIJ,
and Shruti
Shah. She's vice president of
Transparency
International-USA, a watchdog
group that seeks
to expose corruption globally.
So, Gerard Ryle, tell us,
explain to us what
these folks are doing in these
dealings, and
what is illegal about it?
GERARD RYLE, Director,
International Consortium
of Investigative Journalists:
Well, a lot
of what happens in the offshore
world is actually
legal, but where you have
secrecy, which is
exactly what the offshore world
abides, then
you have the potential for
wrongdoing.
And certainly, in the documents
that we have
seen, there was wrongdoing. I
mean, it's almost
ridiculous to think that Mossack
Fonseca,
this company, didn't actually
know who their
clients were. And some of these
clients appear
on sanctions lists, for
instance, or they
are drug dealers or mafia
bosses.
GWEN IFILL: So, when they put
out a statement
that says this wasn't our intent
to facilitate
anything illegal?
GERARD RYLE: I think it is the
whole system
here that is wrong.
I think what you're seeing here
is, they are
claiming their major -- their
clients were
actually the banks and the
accountancy firms
that were basically going to
them for their
end client. It's almost
unbelievable to think
that they actually didn't know
who these people
really were.
GWEN IFILL: Shruti Shah, they
often say it
is what is legal that is the
crime.
SHRUTI SHAH, Vice President,
Transparency
International-USA: You're
absolutely right
there as well.
And what Gerard just said was
that it is absolutely
legal in many parts of the world
to form a
company without disclosing who
the true beneficial
owner is, including right here
in the United
States.
In every state in the U.S., you
can form a
company without having to
disclose who the
person is that really controls
the company
or derives economic benefit from
it. And also
here, you know, people,
gatekeepers such as
real estate agents and others,
don't have
to do any due diligence on
buyers' identities
or the sources of their funds.
So, what he has pointed out is
really the
crux of the problem. The
structure needs reform.
GWEN IFILL: Even though, in this
case, in
these sets of documents, we
haven't seen -- or
at least I haven't read about a
lot of U.S.
names and U.S. connections.
GERARD RYLE: Well, it is the
first time, though,
we are actually seeing U.S.
jurisdictions
coming out in a big leak.
We are seeing a lot of documents
from Nevada,
for instance, and also from
Wyoming, which
we have never seen before. But,
I mean, people
think of the offshore world as
being some
Caribbean island somewhere. It's
not. It is
actually spread around the
world. It is in
First World places, as well as
Third World
places.
GWEN IFILL: Where are the most
popular places
to hide money?
GERARD RYLE: Well, the most
popular place
to hide money is here in the
U.S., in fact,
and in Britain.
A lot of the money flow that we
see from Russia,
from China, from Africa is
actually coming
in to the banks here in the U.S.
and to Britain.
And that's why we're seeing so
many banks
in the data. They are actually
the users of
this world.
GWEN IFILL: Are you saying that
it is perfectly
fine for people to do that, as
long as the
laws do not account for anything
shady?
SHRUTI SHAH: What I am saying is
that it shouldn't
be so easy for money launderers,
drug traffickers
and other criminals from around
the world
including corrupt public
officials, to be
able to access the global
financial system
with such ease using anonymous
companies and
hide their true identities.
This veil has to be lifted. We
really need
to know who the true owners are
behind these
companies. And we need to end
the secrecy,
particularly, as Gerard pointed
out, Delaware
is home to thousands of shell
companies. Nevada,
which he pointed out.
Now, Mossack Fonseca has a
presence in Nevada,
and it's not by accident. Again,
it's one
of those states that is known
for its business-friendly
corporation laws.
GWEN IFILL: Has there been
fallout from the
publication of this information
so far?
GERARD RYLE: Well, before we
even published,
Vladimir Putin's spokesman came
out last Monday
and attacked us because we had
sent a list
of questions asking why
associates very close
to him, what we were seeing in
the documents
is almost $2 billion had flowed
through offshore
companies involving people very
close to Vladimir
Putin, including the godfather
of his child.
And one of the offshore
companies we saw was
the owner of a ski resort in
Russia where
Vladimir Putin's daughter got
married.
GWEN IFILL: I saw that Nawaz
Sharif, the prime
minister of Pakistan, his
children all have
these kinds of companies.
GERARD RYLE: Yes.
Well, we saw the biggest ever
protest in Iceland
today. In fact, the entire
parliament house
there was surrounded by people
protesting
about the fact that we revealed
that the prime
minister of Iceland had a secret
offshore
account that had millions of
dollars in bank
bonds.
And if you recall, in Iceland,
there was a
crisis a few years ago where all
the banks
melted down. And he was actually
elected to
sort that problem out, without
telling the
people that he had a secret
company that had
bonds in the same banks.
GWEN IFILL: If you are an
ordinary person
who has a savings account, a
checking account,
maybe still a passbook, how does
this affect
you?
SHRUTI SHAH: Let me explain how
it affects
you, both in the international
stage and right
here in the U.S.
In the international scene, when
you see corrupt
people stealing money from their
own people,
it leads to loss of trust in
government. It
creates instability, leads to
conflict, and
really poses a national security
problem for
the U.S.
In terms of right here domestic
-- in the
domestic context, you see the
real estate
boom in places like Manhattan
and also Miami
being fueled by these anonymous
real estate
purchases, which means that
ordinary citizens
like doctors, nurses,
schoolteachers can't
buy houses in these places
because they are
so unaffordable.
That is how, I think, it really
affects us
in the U.S.
GWEN IFILL: Gerard Ryle, we're
talking about
more than 11 million documents
from one single
law firm.
GERARD RYLE: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Is this the tip of
an iceberg?
GERARD RYLE: It has to be,
because we know
that even though Mossack Fonseca
is one of
the biggest incorporators of
offshore companies
around the world, there are
about 800 others
ones around there.
So we are only really seeing a
small slice
of this world. And what is
stunning is that
there are so many politicians
that we -- what
we saw. There are 12 current and
former world
leaders. There are about 140
politicians in
all, and then hundreds more of
their associates.
GWEN IFILL: So, Shruti Shah, how
do you get
to the bottom of this?
SHRUTI SHAH: Well, you need to
call for reform.
And this is where they have done
us a whole
lot of good in calling attention
to this issue
of anonymous companies. There
have been several
past investigations which have
talked about
the role that anonymous
companies play in
aiding criminals.
I really do hope that this
actually leads
to actual structural reform,
i.e., in the
U.S., we start collecting
information on beneficial
ownership of shell companies. We
do ask our
gatekeepers, such as people in
the real estate
industry, to do due diligence.
And, also, responsibility lies
with the banks.
Banks should be required to
determine and
verify who the beneficial owner
is of their
covered clients. I think that
all of these
three things, if we can manage
to do them
in the U.S., it would make the
U.S. financial
system less vulnerable to dirty
money.
GWEN IFILL: This seems so much
easier said
than done. What you just laid
out sounds like
a very high mountain to change.
SHRUTI SHAH: I would disagree.
Two of these
things can be done without
legislation.
With regard to my last point
about, you know,
requiring financial institutions
to determine
and verify the beneficial owner
of the (INAUDIBLE)
actually proposed a rule in
2014. It still
needs to be finalized -- 18
months after the
rule was introduced, it has not
yet been finalized.
Maybe this will give them the
push to do it.
GWEN IFILL: Maybe so.
Shruti Shah, vice president of
Transparency
International, and Gerard Ryle,
the director
of the ICIJ, thank you both very
much.
SHRUTI SHAH: Thank you.
GERARD RYLE: Thank you.
SHRUTI SHAH: Thank you so much.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": how
the drop
in oil prices is hurting a key
U.S. ally in
the fight against ISIS; and a
look at the
intense social pressures
American girls face
in a world dominated by
smartphones.
But, first, John Yang has been
in Wisconsin
this past week talking to
voters. It's a battle-tested
state that's seen its share of
political turmoil
over the past five years.
MAN: Team Trump pass. Make
America great again
hats.
JOHN YANG: Hours before the
doors opened on
Sunday, people were already
lining up outside
of Donald Trump rally in West
Allis, Wisconsin.
WOMAN: Go Trump. Whoo!
JOHN YANG: Jim Marlow, a small
business owner
from Muskego, got here at noon
for the event
that began at 7:00 p.m.
MAN: I see strength and I see
power and I
see somebody who's not afraid to
say it like
he feels it. Even if he
potentially is a little
abrasive sometimes, you know
what, when I'm
in my living room, I'm a little
abrasive too.
JOHN YANG: Leanne Patnod (ph)
and her daughter,
Kayla Lumay (ph), came from
Green Bay, 125
miles away.
WOMAN: He may be a billionaire,
but he feels
a lot of the same way us poor
people feel,
you know, the tax issue, the
illegal immigrants
taking jobs, the manufacturing
going overseas.
You know, we have lost a lot.
JOHN YANG: All of that praise
sounds familiar,
but Wisconsin is presenting
Trump with something
he's never seen before, united
opposition
from the state's Republican
establishment
and conservative media.
DR. CHARLES FRANKLIN, Marquette
University
Law School: There is clear
opposition to Donald
Trump because is he front-runner
and a real
effort in the Republican Party
to prevent
him from being the nominee.
JOHN YANG: Charles Franklin is
the director
of the respected Marquette Law
School poll.
His latest survey shows that Ted
Cruz has
catapulted into a 10-point
statewide lead
over Trump.
DR. CHARLES FRANKLIN: That's a
tremendous
increase, and I don't think Ted
Cruz's issue
positions changed over that
period.
JOHN YANG: Cruz gained momentum
last week
with an endorsement from
Republican Governor
Scott Walker.
CHARLIE SYKES, Radio Talk Show
Host: The notion
that Donald Trump has and that
many of the
Trumpkins have that the politics
is involved
with smash-mouth.
JOHN YANG: In addition,
conservative talk
show hosts like Charley Sykes
are using the
airwaves to rally their
audiences against
Trump.
CHARLIE SYKES: Ted Cruz was not
my first choice
or my second choice. I'm more
anti-Trump than
I am pro-Cruz. So, you know, the
key thing
at this point is to stop Donald
Trump from
getting that 1,237 votes on the
first ballot
of the convention.
He's actually almost this
cartoon version
of every stereotype that
liberals would have
of what they think of
conservative, xenophobic,
racist, misogynistic. But the
problem is,
he's not a cartoon. He is the
leading Republican
candidate. And it poses a threat
to everything
we have claimed about ourselves,
everything
we have tried to do.
JOHN YANG: What about the other
Republican
candidate, Ohio Governor John
Kasich?
CHARLIE SYKES: The vote on April
5 is going
to be a binary choice. This is
going to be
the closest thing you have had
to a head-to-head
matchup between Ted Cruz and
Donald Trump,
and I think it is going to be
the first of
the rest of the campaign.
JOHN YANG: But at a Kasich event
at a Madison
sports bar over the weekend,
Brian Keith,
an accountant from Monroe, said
he's sticking
with the man from Ohio.
MAN: I think that John Kasich
has got a huge
ramp to go up to try to make it.
But, at the
end of the day, maybe there is a
chance that
if he gets some momentum here in
Wisconsin,
he starts moving forward, that
maybe there
is something that can happen.
Donald Trump has no character.
Sorry to say
it. And from what I have seen
with Ted Cruz,
I'm not sure that he's got the
amount of character
needed either. So we need
better-character
people running America and
helping America
be better.
JOHN YANG: The Democratic
front-runner is
also facing a tough challenge
here in Wisconsin.
Polls show Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders
in a virtual tie. But the
dynamics of that
race are very different from the
Republicans.
DR. CHARLES FRANKLIN: On the
Democratic side,
it's less clear that this is an
attempt to
prevent Hillary Clinton from
being the nominee.
JOHN YANG: Over this snowy
weekend at the
Dane County farmer's market in
Madison, the
talk over breakfast, politics.
WOMAN: They can get behind such
extremism
as Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: Retired teachers Ruby
and Joe Cabibbo
now run a bakery. They like what
Sanders says,
but they're voting for Clinton.
JOE CABIBBO, Wisconsin: Reaching
too high
isn't necessarily going to get
very much done.
And I think her approach is more
realistic
and have a better chance of
actually being
implemented.
RUBY CABIBBO, Wisconsin: I think
part of it
is her plans have more
forethought and follow-through
in them. And I think what she is
supposing,
she is going to be able to do.
And that's
why I'm strongly behind her.
JOHN YANG: But in this liberal
enclave, home
to the University of Wisconsin,
we found a
lot of Sanders supporters.
M.J. Bowman (ph) is a nurse.
WOMAN: I tell people all the
time don't listen
what people say about Bernie.
Listen to what
Bernie has to say. And you will
get it, because
he gets it.
JOHN YANG: Travis Gorash (ph) is
a graduate
student.
MAN: He believes in a lot of the
same interests
that I do, mainly getting
corporate interests
out of politics, decreasing the
price of higher
education overall. So, out of
the two candidates,
he is the choice for me.
JOHN YANG: Rachel Beerstra (ph)
and Alissa
Redazel (ph) are Wisconsin
juniors.
WOMAN: I think that like, in
this country,
big money has just gotten too
much into politics,
which is, like, exactly what
politics shouldn't
be, because it should of and by
and for the
people.
WOMAN: If you just look at
everything that
he has been saying over the
entire kind of
time frame that he has been in
politics or
around politics, he's been
pretty consistent.
And that's not something that I
am seeing
with a lot of the other
candidates.
JOHN YANG: Polls show this is
Sanders' base.
DR. CHARLES FRANKLIN: Sanders is
doing enormously
well with voters under 45 and
unbelievably
well among those under 30.
Voters are telling us in their
polls that
even young voters are going to
go to the polls.
Now, that's the great question
for Election
Day, is, do those young voters
really turn
out for Sanders and give him
that enormous
vote, which is holding him up in
the polls
right now?
WOMAN: I would like to get rid
of the stigma
for students. I don't like that,
the unreliability.
I don't like that. Don't think
of us as unreliable.
Think of us as people that are
just as interested
in this as you are.
JOHN YANG: Clinton's strengths
are in urban
Milwaukee.
DR. CHARLES FRANKLIN: Among
likely voters,
Hillary Clinton is winning
nonwhite voters
pretty substantially.
JOHN YANG: At the farmer's
market, we also
met undecided voters like
retired forest pathologist
Alan Pray (ph).
MAN: Well, I was going to have
coffee with
one of my friends on Monday, and
we're going
to talk about it. So, I will be
down to the
last minute. When I walk in
there, I won't
know until I'm going to -- when
I actually
get the ballot on Tuesday
morning.
JOHN YANG: It's a dilemma, no
doubt, that
many voters across Wisconsin are
facing tonight.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Milwaukee.
GWEN IFILL: And on the trail
today, the Republican
candidates jabbed at each other
in the final
hours before the polls open in
Wisconsin.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
When we get to the convention,
they're going
to wonder, who can beat Hillary,
which I consistently
do and they do not. And that's
why they're
starting to trash me. They want
to dirty me
up, like they have dirtied
themselves up.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
He's one and 30. He ought to get
the hell
out, honestly. He's just like a
stubborn guy.
He's stubborn. He doesn't want
to leave. They
asked him the other day, are you
going to
leave? No, I'm not going to
leave.
And let me tell you, he hurts me
much more
than he hurts Cruz. Cruz wants
him out. Cruz
is wrong.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Our campaign still has a clear
path to earning
1,237 delegates before the
convention. That
is our plan A. That's what we're
focused on
doing. Now, I recognize Donald
wants to change
the standard; he doesn't want
the standard
to be who can earn a majority,
because he
can't earn a majority.
GWEN IFILL: On the Democratic
side, Bernie
Sanders touted his chances
against his rival
in the upcoming primaries, while
Clinton focused
her criticism on the Republican
front-runner.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
If we win in New York ate,
between you and
me, I don't want to get Hillary
Clinton more
nervous than she already is.
(LAUGHTER)
(APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: She's
already under a
lot of pressure. So don't tell
her this.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: But I
think, we win here,
we win in New York state, we're
on our way
to the White House.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
There are people who don't
believe that the
minimum wage should be raised.
In fact, Donald
Trump has said that wages are
too high. A
lot of members of his party
agree. Right?
WOMAN: He's fired.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: "He's
fired." That's
funny.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: For more on what's
next on the
path to the White House, we turn
to Politics
Monday.
That's Tamara Keith of NPR
joining us tonight
from Milwaukee, and Amy Walter
of The Cook
Political Report.
OK, so, Amy, let's start with
this countdown
to Wisconsin. What do you
expect?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: The
expectations now -- and, of
course, they have
not always proved to be correct,
but the expectations
right now, Ted Cruz ahead in
Wisconsin, will
win Wisconsin.
And Bernie Sanders with a very
narrow lead,
he could still hold on to that,
but it's not
going to be a blowout.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, you are in
Wisconsin tonight.
What's it look like there?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
there is a little snow falling.
And I have
been to a couple of Bernie
Sanders events
in the last couple of days where
they had
a bigger venue than they
ultimately needed.
There was an event at a big
basketball arena
last night. It holds 17,000
people. About
5,000 showed up. Tonight, he was
supposed
to be in another big basketball
arena here
in Milwaukee, and they moved the
event to
nearby convention center.
Now, part of that may also be
that Donald
Trump has a rally very nearby
and they wanted
to get a little bit more
separation.
GWEN IFILL: It's really hard to
tell anymore
from crowd sizes, because he has
been getting
-- incredible crowd sizes rule
the day.
TAMARA KEITH: Crowd sizes -- the
other thing
to point out, Bernie Sanders
gets 4,000 people,
and that is considered
disappointing. Hillary
Clinton gets 2,300, and that is
a really big
rally for Hillary Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: So let's talk about
the Republicans
for a moment. Donald Trump is
goading John
Kasich to quit. Why won't he?
AMY WALTER: I think John Kasich
really believes
in what he said in that clip,
which is: At
the end of the day you have two
very damaged
candidates who are either
trailing Hillary
Clinton by a great deal, which
is Donald Trump,
or tied with Hillary Clinton and
has very
high negatives. I do not. And I
will look
like a much better candidate
come July, and
people will turn to me because
they will see
the other two can't win.
The problem with that is two
things. One,
what Republican primary voters
have said throughout
this primary is, we may not all
agree on the
same candidate, but one thing
that 60-plus
percent of voters have said so
far is, we
don't want somebody who is
considered an establishment
or an insider. Kasich fits into
the establishment
insider category.
And the other thing that they
have been looking
for is somebody who is going to
shake up the
system. John Kasich, not
somebody who is going
to shake up the system. So it's
very difficult
for me to believe that, even if
it gets very
messy, which it's going to be,
much messier,
by the time we get to the
convention, Kasich
still has a very difficult path
ahead of him
to be seen as the person who
would be picked.
GWEN IFILL: And, Tam, Ted Cruz
has turned
almost exclusively to
delegate-hunting.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
And, you know, one fascinating
thing watching
TV here in Wisconsin is that Ted
Cruz is running
an attack ad against John
Kasich. So, Kasich
is right that they are going
after him. Ted
Cruz is saying, well, maybe we
could still
get to the magic number, but
more likely he
just wants to prevent Donald
Trump from getting
that number.
GWEN IFILL: And one thing
layered over all
of this, of course, Amy, is that
Donald Trump
-- and we're getting -- we're
seeing more
and more evidence of this every
day -- is
massively unpopular in the fall.
AMY WALTER: Is massively
unpopular, and it
doesn't seem to matter right now
with Republican
primary voters.
GWEN IFILL: No.
AMY WALTER: And, in fact, Gwen,
I have been
talking about this for some time
about his
liabilities, and yet what
Republicans, a lot
of primary voters are saying,
they do still
believe that is he electable and
it's important
for them to send a message.
Look, a lot of Republicans said,
you know
what, in the last two elections,
you guys
in the media and the
establishment said you
have to support John McCain and
Mitt Romney
because they are the winnable
candidates.
Yes, they may be too moderate,
yes, they may
be too establishment for you,
but these are
the only people that can win.
And then they
both went on to lose.
And so a lot of Republican
primary voters
say, who are you to say who is
electable?
You have been wrong every other
time. I think
that this is the more electable
candidate.
And dissuading them from that
point of view
is going to be very difficult.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, let's turn back
to the Democrats
for a moment.
There was a remarkable story
this morning
in The New York Times which read
a lot like
the kinds of stories you read
after a campaign
is over in which the Bernie
Sanders folks
were openly on the record
mulling over all
the mistakes they have made so
far, if we
had gone after her harder in
Iowa, if only
we had done this in New
Hampshire.
Does that change -- is that an
admission of
some kind?
TAMARA KEITH: It was sort of a
premortem postmortem.
And Bernie Sanders is saying and
his campaign
staff, not in that article, but
in other venues,
are saying, absolutely, we still
believe we
have a path.
I think that some of the
campaign staff have
said for a long time that they
wish that he
had gone after her, that he
hadn't let her
off the hook on the e-mails,
that he had started
talking about the speeches at
Goldman Sachs
and other companies sooner.
But Bernie Sanders didn't in
part because
Bernie Sanders believes that his
brand is
his integrity. His brand is not
doing the
personal attacks in that way.
And in recent
days, he has -- he has been
going less hard
on Hillary Clinton, though today
he did mention
Wall Street fund-raisers.
But he has -- in some ways, it
almost seems
like his heart has never quite
been in the
attack mode.
GWEN IFILL: But I should say he
is outraising
her by a lot, fund-raising.
TAMARA KEITH: Forty-four million
dollars,
he raised in March alone, mostly
from small-dollar
contributions, people giving
again and again.
Hillary Clinton's numbers are
just out today,
and it was $29.5 million in the
same month.
So, Bernie Sanders is
outspending her significantly,
which means he's not going
anywhere. The premortem
postmortem was a little bit
early. Bernie
Sanders can stay in this
campaign, can keep
running ads, outspending her on
television
ads, all the way to the
California primary
on June 6.
GWEN IFILL: And scuff her up a
bit.
AMY WALTER: Well, maybe.
But I still think, when you look
at her numbers,
she is still popular among
Democrats. She
and Bernie Sanders are equally
popular. In
fact, they both have approval
ratings among
Democrats in the 70s. Democratic
primary voters,
even in Wisconsin, the latest
poll that we
saw out of Wisconsin, who are
voting for Bernie
Sanders also believe that
Hillary Clinton
is ultimately going to be the
nominee.
At the end of the day, the best
thing going
for Hillary Clinton right now is
Donald Trump.
And Donald Trump is doing more
to motivate
the kinds of voters that Hillary
Clinton needs
to turn out in November than
anything she
could do on her own.
There is a skirmish going on
right now on
the Democratic side between
Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders on some
issues and over
this fight about delegates. But
on the Republican
side, there is an actual, like,
thermonuclear
war.
GWEN IFILL: But why is she
leapfrogging to
New York? She seems to be
spending more time
campaigning there than in
Wisconsin, and that
is next week.
AMY WALTER: That's next week.
And she wants
to be able to point an
exclamation point on
her delegate lead.
She is still in the catbird
seat. She's still
on track for the nomination
based on the delegate
count. The only way for Sanders
to catch up
is to win Wisconsin by a huge
percentage,
and then to defeat her in New
York. Again,
he would have to beat her by a
big percentage.
If she wins New York by a big
margin, the
delegate numbers just simply
aren't going
to add up for Bernie Sanders.
But, at the
end of the day, as I said, I
don't think this
is a fight that is problematic
for the ultimate
Democratic nominee. It's the
fight that is
going on, on the Republican side
that is helping
energize Democrats.
The fact that this fight has not
been bloody
and messy, like it has been on
the Republican
side, is a good thing for
Democrats. And,
quite frankly, for Hillary
Clinton to hone
in on the message that Bernie
Sanders has
raised about income inequality,
stagnant middle
class, is going to be important
for her to
have throughout the fall.
TAPPER: Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report,
and Tamara Keith of NPR out
there in Milwaukee
in the snow, thank you both very
much.
GWEN IFILL: The crash in global
oil prices
and two years of war are having
a real effect
on the economic stability of the
Kurdistan
region of Northern Iraq, a main
U.S. ally
in the fight against ISIS, just
as the battle
for the ISIS stronghold of Mosul
begins.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports.
JANE FERGUSON: The fortunes of
people living
in the shadow of Irbil's ancient
Citadel have
fluctuated dramatically over the
centuries.
Nowadays, times are tough. The
economy in
Kurdistan is in freefall.
Government salaries
have stopped, and other work is
hard to come
by, as foreign investors have
fled.
In this tea shop, men spend
their days discussing
the crisis, waiting for things
to improve.
Dawood Madhi was a civil
servant. He has family
on his mind.
DAWOOD MADHI, Kurdistan (through
translator):
I have three sons who don't have
work. Also,
I used to have a small pension,
which was
not even enough to buy medicine
for my illness.
I receive about $150 a month. I
am 66 years
old and I am retired. I am not
able to do
another job.
JANE FERGUSON: Those protecting
these lands
are also not getting paid.
Kurdish fighters,
called Peshmerga, who defend the
semiautonomous
region, saw their wages stop
four months ago.
Since ISIS overran swathes of
Iraq in 2014,
Peshmerga forces have pushed
them back from
Kurdish lands. They are now
holding a lengthy
front line against the group,
aided by us
airstrikes and intelligence.
They are America's
strongest ally in the fight
against ISIS.
And Senators John McCain and
Lindsey Graham
are pushing to find emergency
funds for the
Kurds. So far, that money hasn't
arrived,
and the Peshmerga are broke.
Kurdistan's regional government
spokesman,
Safin Dizayi, fully admits this
is a crisis.
SAFIN DIZAYI, Kurdish Regional
Government
Spokesman: Definitely, the
Peshmerga are fighting
a war which is a matter of life
and death.
They will continue to fight even
if they are
-- if they continue to be
unpaid. But while
they are fighting and they are
very vulnerable
to attack of ISIL in every form,
their families
have to survive. Their kids have
to go to
school.
JANE FERGUSON: Peshmerga forces
are woefully
underequipped, says the
government here.
SAFIN DIZAYI: When we have
international delegations
and senior people coming to
Kurdistan, they
go to the battlefront. They
speak very highly
of Peshmergas. They pat on the
back, and,
unfortunately, sometimes, we
have been patronized.
We can do without the
patronizing.
What we need is some more
assistance, particularly
for the Peshmergas. And this
war, if this
war needs to be won -- often,
people say that
Peshmergas are fighting for --
on behalf of
the international community and
the free world.
If that is the case, then there
has to be
more assistance. Yes, we do
appreciate what
has been provided so far, but
this is not
sufficient.
JANE FERGUSON: The economy here
has largely
depended on oil exports in
recent years. Oil
revenues and foreign investors
made Kurdistan
a booming success story from
2003. Since then,
a crash in oil prices and a war
with ISIS
have pushed that boom into a
bust.
After disputes over oil exports,
the Baghdad
government has frozen payments
to Kurdistan
from the country's national
budget. Legally,
Kurdistan is entitled to 17
percent of all
oil revenues from Baghdad's
annual budget.
Since those were cut in 2014, it
is estimated
Baghdad owes Kurdistan around
$20 billion.
The oil economy had funded an
oversized bureaucracy
that included excessive amounts
of government
jobs. That has become
unsustainable. Construction
projects were the most visible
evidence of
the oil boom. Until the crisis,
foreign investors
had great confidence in
Kurdistan. Most construction
sites we saw in Irbil had
halted. Half-finished
highways circle the city.
For local businessman Rizgar
Kadir, whose
construction company has a
contract to build
a Kempinski Hotel, business has
been affected
by ISIS.
RIZGAR KADIR, Businessman: When
ISIS started
-- took over the Mosul, some
Indian workers
has been kidnapped by them. The
Indian government
decided to take back all the
employees. They
opened an office in Irbil and
they took back
Indians. We lost around 800
employees. Now
we have around 200 or so of them
back. We
are working on the project, but
very slow.
JANE FERGUSON: As the sun falls
over Irbil,
the city's streets become
busier. Young men
gather in this market. Many are
put off marriage
and a family until times get
better. At least
here, they can meet friends and
enjoy a cheap
meal.
Rivan is a teacher who hasn't
been paid in
four months. Yes, it's tough, he
says, but
people here believe if their
military can
fight ISIS," or Da'esh, as they
call the group,
without a salary, they should be
just as stoic.
So you haven't received a salary
for four
months?
MAN: Four months, yes.
JANE FERGUSON: How do you
survive?
MAN: Yes, what shall we do? We
are just living.
And we have armed forces,
Peshmerga. They
battle Da'esh without any money.
Yes, we have
to live without money.
JANE FERGUSON: It's a time of
survival and
sacrifice for everyone here,
testing the endurance
of Kurdistan itself.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Irbil, Northern Iraq.
GWEN IFILL: In the eight years
since Apple
unveiled its first smartphone,
an entire generation
of young users has spring up who
never knew
a world without a device in
hand.
That's the starting point for
the latest addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf,
"American Girls:
Social Media and the Secret
Lives of Teenagers,"
by journalist and author Nancy
Jo Sales.
She recently sat down with Hari
Sreenivasan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Joining me now
is author
Nancy Jo Sales.
So, what are the challenges that
American
girls are facing today that are
different
from the ones they have always
faced?
NANCY JO SALES, Author,
"American Girls: Social
Media and the Secret Lives of
Teenagers":
Girls use social media lot.
They're on their
phones a lot. And I think most
parents are
aware of that.
So, really, the question is,
what is happening
there, and how are these kind of
-- some regrettable
trends that we have seen
happening for some
time, such as the sexualization
of girls,
bullying, how are these moving
on to phones
and on to screens? And what is
this environment
doing to the life of girls and
boys?
HARI SREENIVASAN: You paint a
picture almost
of these young girls at this
kind of intersection
of the existing angst that a
teenage girl
has, combined with this
technological leap
that we're all taking together,
combined with
pornography.
NANCY JO SALES: Yes, I think the
kind of elephant,
maybe dinosaur in the room right
now is pornography.
Pornography has been available
online for
some time.
But I don't think we have really
begun to
have a conversation about what
that is doing
to kids. And we know that
they're watching
it. They're teenagers. They're
going through
puberty. They're curious.
They're watching
pornography.
But this tends to be more and
more violent
pornography that is also, one
could I think
reasonably say, very degrading
to women. And
this is where a lot of teenagers
now find
their sex-ed. And porn is also
-- the porn
aesthetic is also really
engulfing social
media. And social media is just
full of really
explicit sexual content.
And whether or not your child
wants to see
it or intends to see it, they
are likely to
see it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What happens
to all of us
when there's, on the one hand,
kind of hyper-sexualization,
hyper-masculinization on the
boys' side and
girls' side? And this -- if this
is the new
sex-ed, they have really reduced
the female
body down into this thing they
can swipe across.
NANCY JO SALES: Yes.
I mean, I think it's really
challenging for
girls especially to have an
expectation to
produce images of themselves in
order to get
validation, the validation that
everybody
seems to want of likes and
friends and followers.
It's very challenging to them, I
think, to
have an expectation to produce
images of themselves
which are sexualized in which
they look -- quote,
unquote -- "hot," and also to
have to navigate
through all these emotions that
come through
comments that might be on these
pictures that
are about how just hot they are
or how not
hot they are.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You capture a
lot of different
conversations, and there seems
to be this
conundrum, where you ask them,
well, if this
is all the stress that's
associated with making
sure you're checking up on your
likes and
your pictures and who liked you
and what did
they say, why are you on it? And
they seem
to say, well, I can't get off
it.
I don't get that.
NANCY JO SALES: Yes, I talked to
more than
200 girls in 10 states over 30
months.
And one of the things that
struck me the most
was how self-aware they are, how
articulate
they were, how analytical they
were about
this very thing they were
engaged in so much
of the time. And they're quite
aware of the
ways in which it's really toxic.
And yet they
can't leave it, because this is
-- this is
the swamp they're swimming in.
This is the
world they're enmeshed in, where
you have
to be on it, or you're not part
of the conversation,
you're not part of what's
happening.
It's -- a girl in New Jersey
described it
as a second world that we live
in. You know,
there's the real world and then
there's the
second world that we're
simultaneously in
kind of all the time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And this is
also affecting
just their relationships with
one another,
even in a non-sexualized way:
Who's my best
friend and what's my best friend
allowed to
say or do to me? Or, you know,
it's just different
than the conversations that I
had growing
up and deciding who to hang out
with.
NANCY JO SALES: It's different
to communicate
from behind a screen, and this
is true for
adults as well. I mean, we know
this from
multiple, multiple studies that
when you communicate
from behind a screen, you're
more likely to
say things that you wouldn't
face to face.
You're more likely to become
aggressive and
even, some studies say,
unethical.
Now, think about that. Like, we
have children
now growing up on phones,
learning to communicate
with each other and be people
from behind
a screen in an environment in
which it's OK
to do stuff that you wouldn't do
if you were
with the person.
I think that's really something
that I think
parents really need to think
about when they
think about how they're kids are
growing up
now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You have a
15-year-old daughter.
How did these conversations go?
She obviously
was living with you at the time
you were working
on all this research. You go on
all these
trips. You talk to all these
girls. You come
back, and then what?
NANCY JO SALES: We talk about it
all the time,
like, on a daily basis, because
to talk to
her about what is going on in
her life is
to talk to her about what is
going on, on
social media, because that's
part of what
teenage life is about now.
So, I just try and have it be an
ongoing conversation
as if I were asking her about
what happened
in school today, you know, and
just kind of
find out what's going on with
your friends.
And sometimes really dramatic
things come
up, and I think a lot of parents
have seen
that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What surprised
me -- and
I'm wondering what surprised you
during the
reporting of this? But there
were -- you had
stories about women -- or young
girls that
were getting plastic surgery so
they could
look better in selfies.
But when you went across all
these different
young women, what shocked you?
NANCY JO SALES: The way that
comments on pictures
were so very sexualized, like,
almost like
catcalling, which if this
happened in the
street, we would say, well,
that's really
insulting.
But on social media, the culture
of social
media is such that you're
supposed to say,
oh, thank you, an emoji with
heart eyes, like,
you said I'm hot. And I'm just
really -- I'm
really concerned as a parent and
as a woman
about what this is doing to a
generation of
girls.
For example, the book, it opens
with a girl
being asked to send nudes. A boy
that she
doesn't know very well says to
her, really
demands of her really, send
nudes. She's not
-- he's not her boyfriend. And
so, you know,
all kinds of thoughts start to
go through
her head. Like, wow, should I be
flattered?
Should I be outraged? Should I
be insulted?
Is this -- should I do it?
Should I not do
it? Well, if I did it, what
would it look
like?
And these are new kinds of
things for anybody
to have to think about,
especially 13-year-old
girls.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, the
book is called
"American Girls: Social Media
and the Secret
Lives of Teenagers."
Author Nancy Jo Sales, thanks so
much for
joining us.
NANCY JO SALES: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: A couple
of weeks ago, we introduced you
to the bubble
quiz, a series of questions by
author Charles
Murray that attempts to reveal
how connected
we are with the culture of
Middle America
and to what degree we live in a
bubble.
He's written a follow-up that
uses data from
the answers. See what he found.
And you can
still take the quiz yourself.
You can find
it on our home page.
And in a weekly poem, a young
gay Chinese-American
poem on identity and expression.
You can listen
him read one of his latest
works.
All that and more is on our Web
site PBS.org/NewsHour.
On "Independent Lens" tonight:
the struggle
a North Dakota hamlet faced when
a white supremacist
moved to town. "Welcome to
Leith" details
the story of Craig Cobb, who in
2012 bought
property and sold it to fellow
white supremacists,
sparking tension as locals
resisted his attempt
to form a majority and take over
the local
government.
MAN: OK, thank you all for
coming. We're going
to get about 20 voters here, and
we will be
MAN: OK, thank you all for
coming. We're going
to get about 20 voters here, and
we will be
in charge of the civic
government of Leith.
In the interim, I wanted to
thank...
in charge of the civic
government of Leith.
In the interim, I wanted to
thank...
(SHOUTING)
MAN: You know, it's really
funny, because
millions of whites have been
driven out of
their neighborhoods and cities
by violence.
And, here, we just have
democracy.
MAN: You represent a dying
cause.
PROTESTER: So, North Dakota, we
have got thing
to say to this.
PROTESTERS: Go home! Go home! Go
home!
GWEN IFILL: "Independent Lens"
airs tonight
on most PBS stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday: a report on the
challenge of keeping
students' data private in the
digital age.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.